README.md, before:

# OpenSSL CA scripts

## Description

The repository is a set of scripts to automate creation of a CA on a base of the OpenSSL tool. It supports:

- Creation of a CA
- Creation of intermediate cetificates
- Creation of server certificates that conform Google Chrome requirements
- Creation of client certificates
- (TODO) Revokation lists

All of this was possible because of [the great article of Jamie Nguyen](https://jamielinux.com/docs/openssl-certificate-authority) and couple of other internet sources.

The scripts are mostly intended to be used for generation of test certificates. If you plan to use it in production please read the article first and examine the sources. At very least you'll probably want to uncomment several `chmod` directives which protect key and certificate files.

## Usage

## Folder stricture

Each of the commands that generate either a CA certificate or an intermediate certificate create the next folder structure:

- `bin` the folder where the scripts go
- `certs` contains PEM files with certificate data
- `private` contains corresponding PEM files with key data
- `csr` contains certificate requests PEM files
- `crl` contains revocation lists files (TODO)
- `openssl.cnf` is a configuration file that is used during the certificate creation on this level
- `index.txt`, `serial`, `crlnumber` are internals that keep the state

### Creation of the CA certificate

In the root of the repository run the next command

```bash
$ ./init-ca.sh root-ca
Creating the root key...
Generating RSA private key, 4096 bit long modulus
................................................................................................................................................................................................++
......................................................++
```

Then you need to enter and repeet a pass phrase to protect your CA key. It may be an arbitrary sequence of symbols. You need to remember it!

```bash
Enter pass phrase for private/ca.key.pem:
Verifying - Enter pass phrase for private/ca.key.pem:
```

The next step is the creation of the root certificate itself. You need to enter the pass phrase of your CA key to proceed. Make sure to specify the common name and the email address fields.

```bash
Creating the root certificate...
Enter pass phrase for private/ca.key.pem:
You are about to be asked to enter information that will be incorporated
into your certificate request.
What you are about to enter is what is called a Distinguished Name or a DN.
There are quite a few fields but you can leave some blank
For some fields there will be a default value,
If you enter '.', the field will be left blank.
-----
Country Name (2 letter code) [DE]:
State or Province Name [Germany]:
Locality Name []:
Organization Name [Acme Test]:
Organizational Unit Name []:CA
Common Name []:Acme Test CA
Email Address []:admin@acme.com
```

Now you have a self-signed CA certificate.

### Creation of an intermediate certificate

In this example, we will create two nested intermediate certificates. Before the creation of an intermediate certificate you need to specify how many of nested intermediates are you going to allow. So for the first intermediate certificate we specify `1` as one more nested intermediate certificate is to be created.

```bash
# Move to the generated folder of the CA first
$ cd root-ca
$ ./bin/init-interm.sh interm-adm 1
Creating the interm-adm key...
Generating RSA private key, 4096 bit long modulus
..........................................++
..........................++
```

Then you need to enter and repeat a pass phrase to protect your **intermediate** certificate's key.

```bash
Enter pass phrase for private/interm-adm.key.pem:
Verifying - Enter pass phrase for private/interm-adm.key.pem:
```

Reenter the pass phrase for your intermediate certificate's key to allow `openssl` to create a certificate request. Make sure to specify values for the common name and the email address fields. Also, in case of the intermediate certificates creation the script uses a strict policy that requres an intermediate certificate has the same values for `Country Name`, `State or Province Name` and `Organization Name` fields as in the CA certificate.

```bash
Creating the interm-adm certificate request...
Enter pass phrase for private/interm-adm.key.pem:
You are about to be asked to enter information that will be incorporated
into your certificate request.
What you are about to enter is what is called a Distinguished Name or a DN.
There are quite a few fields but you can leave some blank
For some fields there will be a default value,
If you enter '.', the field will be left blank.
-----
Country Name (2 letter code) [DE]:   <-- the same as in CA
State or Province Name [Germany]:    <-- the same as in CA
Locality Name []:
Organization Name [Acme Test]:       <-- the same as in CA
Organizational Unit Name []:Adm
Common Name []:Acme Test interm Adm
Email Address []:admin@acme.com
```

The next step is signing the intermediate certificate with the CA's key. So you will be asked to enter the **CA key**'s pass phrase.

```bash
Creating the interm-adm certificate...
Using configuration from /dev/fd/63
Enter pass phrase for /path/to/root-ca/private/ca.key.pem:
Check that the request matches the signature
Signature ok
```

After that, you need to confirm twice and here it is - your intermediate certificate is ready and can be found in the `root-ca/interm-adm/certs` folder. It is issued and signed by the previously created CA certificate.

The creation of a nested intermediate certificate is straightforward. You need to go on the level of the `interm-adm` (parent) certificate and execute the same commands as for the creation of the first intermediate certificate.

```bash
cd root-ca/interm-adm
./bin/init-interm.sh interm-hub
```

The certificate that is created is an edge level intermediate certificate so the number of allowed nested intermediates should be zero. Zero is the default value so you don't need to specify it as an argument. All other things are the same

- Enter and repeat a pass phrase to protect the key of the new certificate
- Enter it again to create a certificate request
- Specify certificate's DN details. Don't forget to use the same values for `Country Name`, `State or Province Name` and `Organization Name` fields as in the CA certificate. Fields `Common Name` and `Email Address` are required.
- Enter the pass phrase of the **parent** intermediate certificate (it is `interm-adm` in our case) to sign the new certificate

That's it, the new intermediate certificate is ready. It is issued and signed by the parent intermediate certificate authority.

## Creation of a server certificate

A server certificate is used during an SSL handshake to establish an HTTPS connection between a client browser and your site. Typically you want the server certificate to be accessible without entering the pass phrase of its key on each OS startup so we are going to generate the key without an encription.

Run the next command and provide a DNS name of your site as an argument.

```bash
$ cd root-ca/interm-adm/interm-hub
$ ./bin/create-server-cert.sh test.example.com
Creation of the test.example.com key...
Generating RSA private key, 2048 bit long modulus
..........................................................+++
......+++
```

There will be no pass phrase request as we are not encrypting the key. Then, a certificate request is created and you are asked to provide distinguished name details for the server certificate. The required fields are 'Common Name' and `Email Address`. **Make sure to enter the main DNS of your site as a value for the Common Name field.**

```bash
Creation of the hub.test certificate request...
You are about to be asked to enter information that will be incorporated
into your certificate request.
What you are about to enter is what is called a Distinguished Name or a DN.
There are quite a few fields but you can leave some blank
For some fields there will be a default value,
If you enter '.', the field will be left blank.
-----
Country Name (2 letter code) [DE]:
State or Province Name [Germany]:
Locality Name []:
Organization Name [Acme Test]:
Organizational Unit Name []:Hub
Common Name []:test.example.com    <-- here it is
Email Address []:admin@acme.com
```

After that, you need to provide the pass phrase of the parent intermediate certificate (interm-hub) to sign the server certificate.

```bash
Creation of the hub.test certificate...
Using configuration from /dev/fd/63
Enter pass phrase for /path/to/root-ca/interm-adm/interm-hub/private/interm-hub.key.pem:
Check that the request matches the signature
Signature ok
```

The server certificate is ready. Check out the SAN section in the certificate

```plain
X509v3 Subject Alternative Name:
    DNS:test.example.com
```

The section is required to make Google Chrome happy. Your site may be accessible via several different DNS names and you may want to use the same server certificate for all of them. In this case, please edit the `create-server-cert.sh` file and add more DNS names into the `[ alt_names ]` section. Lately it may be automated by passing all DNS names as arguments to the script.

### Creation of a client certificate

Client certificates are used for the client certificate authentication during the SSL handshake. Imagine, you want to give an access to a site only to those users who have a certificate (and its private key) issued by your CA or an intermediate authority.

Note that you are not asked to enter a pass phrase to protect the key of the cretificate. It is because scripts are intended to serve testing purposes. If you want to generate client certificates for production edit the `create-client-cert.sh` script and change the generation lines as follows. The difference here is `-aes256` parameter.

```bash
openssl -aes256 genrsa -out private/$USER_NAME.key.pem 2048
# openssl genrsa -out private/$USER_NAME.key.pem 2048
```

To create a client certificate use the next command, provide a meaningful certificate name as an argument. The name is used to name created files only.

```bash
$ cd root-ca/interm-adm/interm-hub
$ ./bin/create-client-cert.sh "alexander sedov"
Creation of the alexander_sedov key...
Generating RSA private key, 2048 bit long modulus
........+++
............................................................+++
```

On the next step you are asked to provide values for the distinguished name of the certificate. Make sure to fill the `Common Name` and `Email Address`.

```bash
Creation of the alexander_sedov certificate request...
You are about to be asked to enter information that will be incorporated
into your certificate request.
What you are about to enter is what is called a Distinguished Name or a DN.
There are quite a few fields but you can leave some blank
For some fields there will be a default value,
If you enter '.', the field will be left blank.
-----
Country Name (2 letter code) [DE]:
State or Province Name [Germany]:
Locality Name []:
Organization Name [Acme Test]:
Organizational Unit Name []:Hub
Common Name []:Alexander Sedov
Email Address []:alexander.sedov@mail.com
```

Then, enter the pass phrase of the parent certificate (interm-hub) key to sign the client certificate.

```bash
Creation of the alexander_sedov certificate...
Using configuration from openssl.cnf
Enter pass phrase for /path/to/root-ca/interm-adm/interm-hub/private/interm-hub.key.pem:
Check that the request matches the signature
Signature ok
```

The certificate is ready and may be found in the `root-ca/interm-adm/interm-hub/certs` folder. The corresponding key is in the `root-ca/interm-adm/interm-hub/private` folder.

## Troubleshooting

- Check if the `openssl` is installed in your system and is in the PATH
- Try to go through the process using the same pass phrase for all (CA and intermediates) keys. Then, if everything goes fine, try to start from the begining using different pass phrases.
- Don't forget to `cd` before executing the `init-interm.sh` script
- Plan the certificate path length from the begining. Basically, when you create a top level intermediate certificate you need to know how many nested intermediates you will create.

Commit message:

Supported start/end dates of client certificates + export into PFX

README.md, after:

# OpenSSL CA scripts

## Description

The repository is a set of scripts to automate creation of a CA on a base of the OpenSSL tool. It supports:

- Creation of a CA
- Creation of intermediate cetificates
- Creation of server certificates that conform Google Chrome requirements
- Creation of client certificates
- (TODO) Revokation lists

All of this was possible because of [the great article of Jamie Nguyen](https://jamielinux.com/docs/openssl-certificate-authority) and couple of other internet sources.

The scripts are mostly intended to be used for generation of test certificates. If you plan to use it in production please read the article first and **examine the sources**.

## TL;DR;

Here is a summary of supported commands:

```bash
# create a CA
./init-ca root-ca
# change the current folder
cd root-ca
# create an intermediate CA
./bin/init-interm.sh IntermCA 0
# change the current folder
cd IntermCA
# create a server certificate
./bin/create-server-cert.sh test.example.com
# create a client certificate
./bin/create-client-cert.sh alexander.sedov 20160101120000Z 20171231235959Z
# create a PFX file from a client certificate
./bin/pem2pfx.sh alexander.sedov
```

## Usage

### Folder structure

Each of the commands that generate either a CA certificate or an intermediate certificate create the next folder structure:

- `bin` the folder where the scripts go
- `certs` contains PEM files with certificate data
- `private` contains corresponding PEM files with key data
- `csr` contains certificate requests PEM files
- `crl` contains revocation lists files (TODO)
- `openssl.cnf` is a configuration file that is used during the certificate creation on this level
- `index.txt`, `serial`, `crlnumber` are internals that keep the state

### Creation of the CA certificate

In the root of the repository run the next command

```bash
$ ./init-ca.sh root-ca
Creating the root key...
Generating RSA private key, 4096 bit long modulus
................................................................................................................................................................................................++
......................................................++
```

Then you need to enter and repeet a pass phrase to protect your CA key. It may be an arbitrary sequence of symbols. You need to remember it!

```bash
Enter pass phrase for private/ca.key.pem:
Verifying - Enter pass phrase for private/ca.key.pem:
```

The next step is the creation of the root certificate itself. You need to enter the pass phrase of your CA key to proceed. Make sure to specify the common name and the email address fields.

```bash
Creating the root certificate...
Enter pass phrase for private/ca.key.pem:
You are about to be asked to enter information that will be incorporated
into your certificate request.
What you are about to enter is what is called a Distinguished Name or a DN.
There are quite a few fields but you can leave some blank
For some fields there will be a default value,
If you enter '.', the field will be left blank.
-----
Country Name (2 letter code) [DE]:
State or Province Name [Germany]:
Locality Name []:
Organization Name [Acme Test]:
Organizational Unit Name []:CA
Common Name []:Acme Test CA
Email Address []:admin@acme.com
```

Now you have a self-signed CA certificate.

### Creation of an intermediate certificate

In this example, we will create two nested intermediate certificates. Before the creation of an intermediate certificate you need to specify how many of nested intermediates are you going to allow. So for the first intermediate certificate we specify `1` as one more nested intermediate certificate is to be created.

```bash
# Move to the generated folder of the CA first
$ cd root-ca
$ ./bin/init-interm.sh interm-adm 1
Creating the interm-adm key...
Generating RSA private key, 4096 bit long modulus
..........................................++
..........................++
```

Then you need to enter and repeat a pass phrase to protect your **intermediate** certificate's key.

```bash
Enter pass phrase for private/interm-adm.key.pem:
Verifying - Enter pass phrase for private/interm-adm.key.pem:
```

Reenter the pass phrase for your intermediate certificate's key to allow `openssl` to create a certificate request. Make sure to specify values for the common name and the email address fields. Also, in case of the intermediate certificates creation the script uses a strict policy that requres an intermediate certificate has the same values for `Country Name`, `State or Province Name` and `Organization Name` fields as in the CA certificate.

```bash
Creating the interm-adm certificate request...
Enter pass phrase for private/interm-adm.key.pem:
You are about to be asked to enter information that will be incorporated
into your certificate request.
What you are about to enter is what is called a Distinguished Name or a DN.
There are quite a few fields but you can leave some blank
For some fields there will be a default value,
If you enter '.', the field will be left blank.
-----
Country Name (2 letter code) [DE]:   <-- the same as in CA
State or Province Name [Germany]:    <-- the same as in CA
Locality Name []:
Organization Name [Acme Test]:       <-- the same as in CA
Organizational Unit Name []:Adm
Common Name []:Acme Test interm Adm
Email Address []:admin@acme.com
```

The next step is signing the intermediate certificate with the CA's key. So you will be asked to enter the **CA key**'s pass phrase.

```bash
Creating the interm-adm certificate...
Using configuration from /dev/fd/63
Enter pass phrase for /path/to/root-ca/private/ca.key.pem:
Check that the request matches the signature
Signature ok
```

After that, you need to confirm twice and here it is - your intermediate certificate is ready and can be found in the `root-ca/interm-adm/certs` folder. It is issued and signed by the previously created CA certificate.

The creation of a nested intermediate certificate is straightforward. You need to go on the level of the `interm-adm` (parent) certificate and execute the same commands as for the creation of the first intermediate certificate.

```bash
cd root-ca/interm-adm
./bin/init-interm.sh interm-hub
```

The certificate that is created is an edge level intermediate certificate so the number of allowed nested intermediates should be zero. Zero is the default value so you don't need to specify it as an argument. All other things are the same

- Enter and repeat a pass phrase to protect the key of the new certificate
- Enter it again to create a certificate request
- Specify certificate's DN details. Don't forget to use the same values for `Country Name`, `State or Province Name` and `Organization Name` fields as in the CA certificate. Fields `Common Name` and `Email Address` are required.
- Enter the pass phrase of the **parent** intermediate certificate (it is `interm-adm` in our case) to sign the new certificate

That's it, the new intermediate certificate is ready. It is issued and signed by the parent intermediate certificate authority.

## Creation of a server certificate

A server certificate is used during an SSL handshake to establish an HTTPS connection between a client browser and your site. Typically you want the server certificate to be accessible without entering the pass phrase of its key on each OS startup so we are going to generate the key without an encription.

Run the next command and provide a DNS name of your site as an argument.

```bash
$ cd root-ca/interm-adm/interm-hub
$ ./bin/create-server-cert.sh test.example.com
Creation of the test.example.com key...
Generating RSA private key, 2048 bit long modulus
..........................................................+++
......+++
```

There will be no pass phrase request as we are not encrypting the key. Then, a certificate request is created and you are asked to provide distinguished name details for the server certificate. The required fields are 'Common Name' and `Email Address`. **Make sure to enter the main DNS of your site as a value for the Common Name field.**

```bash
Creation of the hub.test certificate request...
You are about to be asked to enter information that will be incorporated
into your certificate request.
What you are about to enter is what is called a Distinguished Name or a DN.
There are quite a few fields but you can leave some blank
For some fields there will be a default value,
If you enter '.', the field will be left blank.
-----
Country Name (2 letter code) [DE]:
State or Province Name [Germany]:
Locality Name []:
Organization Name [Acme Test]:
Organizational Unit Name []:Hub
Common Name []:test.example.com    <-- here it is
Email Address []:admin@acme.com
```

After that, you need to provide the pass phrase of the parent intermediate certificate (interm-hub) to sign the server certificate.

```bash
Creation of the hub.test certificate...
Using configuration from /dev/fd/63
Enter pass phrase for /path/to/root-ca/interm-adm/interm-hub/private/interm-hub.key.pem:
Check that the request matches the signature
Signature ok
```

The server certificate is ready. Check out the SAN section in the certificate

```plain
X509v3 Subject Alternative Name:
    DNS:test.example.com
```

The section is required to make Google Chrome happy. Your site may be accessible via several different DNS names and you may want to use the same server certificate for all of them. In this case, please edit the `create-server-cert.sh` file and add more DNS names into the `[ alt_names ]` section. Lately it may be automated by passing all DNS names as arguments to the script.

### Creation of a client certificate

Client certificates are used for the client certificate authentication during the SSL handshake. Imagine, you want to give an access to a site only to those users who have a certificate (and its private key) issued by your CA or an intermediate authority.

Note that you are not asked to enter a pass phrase to protect the key of the cretificate. It is because scripts are intended to serve testing purposes. If you want to generate client certificates for production edit the `create-client-cert.sh` script and change the generation lines as follows. The difference here is `-aes256` parameter.

```bash
openssl -aes256 genrsa -out private/$USER_NAME.key.pem 2048
# openssl genrsa -out private/$USER_NAME.key.pem 2048
```

To create a client certificate use the next command, provide a meaningful certificate name as an argument. The name is used to name created files only. Also, optional start and end certificate dates are supported as the second and the thitd parameter. If either start or end date are omitted than the certificate is created with a validity period starting from now and 375 days long.

```bash
$ cd root-ca/interm-adm/interm-hub
$ ./bin/create-client-cert.sh "alexander sedov" 20160101120000Z 20171231235959Z
Creation of the alexander_sedov key...
Generating RSA private key, 2048 bit long modulus
........+++
............................................................+++
```

On the next step you are asked to provide values for the distinguished name of the certificate. Make sure to fill the `Common Name` and `Email Address`.

```bash
Creation of the alexander_sedov certificate request...
You are about to be asked to enter information that will be incorporated
into your certificate request.
What you are about to enter is what is called a Distinguished Name or a DN.
There are quite a few fields but you can leave some blank
For some fields there will be a default value,
If you enter '.', the field will be left blank.
-----
Country Name (2 letter code) [DE]:
State or Province Name [Germany]:
Locality Name []:
Organization Name [Acme Test]:
Organizational Unit Name []:Hub
Common Name []:Alexander Sedov
Email Address []:alexander.sedov@mail.com
```

Then, enter the pass phrase of the parent certificate (interm-hub) key to sign the client certificate.

```bash
Creation of the alexander_sedov certificate...
Using configuration from openssl.cnf
Enter pass phrase for /path/to/root-ca/interm-adm/interm-hub/private/interm-hub.key.pem:
Check that the request matches the signature
Signature ok
```

The certificate is ready and may be found in the `root-ca/interm-adm/interm-hub/certs` folder. The corresponding key is in the `root-ca/interm-adm/interm-hub/private` folder.

## Troubleshooting

- Check if the `openssl` is installed in your system and is in the PATH
- Try to go through the process using the same pass phrase for all (CA and intermediates) keys. Then, if everything goes fine, try to start from the begining using different pass phrases.
- Don't forget to `cd` before executing the `init-interm.sh` script
- Plan the certificate path length from the begining. Basically, when you create a top level intermediate certificate you need to know how many nested intermediates you will create.
